# Elements of Modern Computing Systems

Alan Turing's machine remained theoretical for some time while with no real breakthrough in how to actually construct this machine with physical devices. Turing's vision was a machine in which instructions could swapped so that the computer could run any program without much hassle. This vision was shared or understood by a brilliant mathematician John Von Neumann who read Alan Turing's work during his time at Cambridge and later work as a professor. He wrote a draft just after the world war ll on the design of the EDVAC computer, which was one of the first that used the stored-program architecture. At the time there were some machines which we may call computers but they were hardwired and specialized to do limited set of tasks. While there were several people among them Turing that worked on this proposed architecture it became known as the "von Neumann architecture" as his work circulated more than that of others. The von Neumann architecture uses three core elements, the central processing unit, memory and input/output devices.

In this piece of work we will understand that the design of computers is not just a random assemble of some electronic components. We discover beauty within the complex system made from elegant design principles among them modularity and hierarchy. We will divide and conquer the investigation as we deal with layers of *abstraction* one at a time. The levels of abstractions may be presented as follows. At the very top of this we find the software elements which are the applications we use everyday such as the text editing program i am using to write this paragraf. Within that same bucket we find high-level programming which you might have had some experience with. The *hello world* program is a classic introduction to programming such as the following piece of code. 

```python
print("Hello World!")
```

Underneath that there are systems software where the operating systems is one of the most important pieces of software any digital device has and it is what boots up the computer, manage files, memory and processing power as well as many other things. This is also where the compiler exists because the high-level program as shown above is of course an abstraction. The compiler translate this code in some intermediate steps into machine langauge, which by itself is an abstraction that is an agreed upon sequences of binary 0's and 1's. We then arrive at the *hardware architecture* which itself form layers of abstractions with larger combined units made up of the elementary logic gates. These gates are then made of several devices which have a switching mechanisms and in modern computing systems these are very small transistors. This is where we end up at level of physics and how the high-level program became got a physical implementation that is materialized in the world.

There are many brilliant ideas found in each layer and it's gonna be fascinating as we make our way towards the very well known interface of the screen, keyboard, and mouse that we have come so accumsted to. The approach here will be buttom up. Conversely one could have considers a top down approach, thinking about the market needs and demands then designing a blueprint followed up by detailed physical design. In either case one could arrive at the chipsets we have built so far. These two approaches reflects something that I believe are often involved with inventions of almost any physical product. One angle is the technological push and scientific discoveries allowing us to arrive at a product like a computer. The alternative view is to look from a market perspective and what it is the user wants to achieve. When apple launched its iPhone, most people didn't necessarily knew they would have a desire for such a device. It created a demand, the technology was pushed bottom-up into the market. In the aftermath, people have begun demanding more from these devices leading to a market pull, a top-down set of new needs for hardware designers to meet. This is true with computers themselves as demand for new applications have pushed engineers to develop new and better starting with inventions all the way down to the smallest devices.
