# Historical Perspective on Computation

**From counting to number systems**

Before we begin on the journey into the marticulate world of computer science i believe that a historical perspective is suiteable. I know it's hard to imagine a time before *print("Hello World")* but in fact the digital age is young and even your high school algebra is somewhat a new construct. Georges Ifrah's book *The history of numbers* is an excellent piece of work that goes all the way back and tells the tale of how our species have developed our number manipulation abilities and there is no doubt that the ideas of counting and development of number reach far back and had important practical use. Counting "is what allowed people to take measure of their world, to understand it better, and put some of its innumerable secrets to good use" (page 16, Georges Ifrah). One can say that our brains are computational by themselves as they process the information fed back from the environment, but what i am more explictly refering to here is computation in the sense of making logical statements through what we would recognize as mathematics. Counting for example was the very first sort of mathematics and as mentioned had very practical use. The ability to "count the days in the year, to make deals and bargains, to list their members, their marriages, their bereavements, their goods and flocks, their solders, their losses, and record the data of the foundation of their cities or one of their victories". This is what is meant by taking measure and describe the state of the world using computational concepts. The first tools for counting were things like bones, wooden sticks, body parts or pebbles that helped keeping tally. These tools had a one-to-one mapping between some count and one object, line, part and so on. In fact early signs of counting systems shows the limit of the human eye to distinguish only a single item up to four pairs of an item, a system that would count something like 1,2,3,4, many. "In order to deal with quantities above four people would use methods such as counting with their body parts, pebbles, tally marks and so on all based on one-for-one correspondence" (page 19). Each item stood for something like (sheep, days, debts) thus refered to a **one-to-one correspondence**. Every culture developed some mechanism for counting and so this concept was and is universal and a important part of societies and human life. The advancement of society very much stands on the shoulders of our ability to measure and understand the world around us, something that continues to be relevant. 

Counting systems were used and developed but they have some clear disadvantages. For example counting to more than 50 or 100 involved having many pebbles, multiple people or wooden sticks. The next great idea was therefore to use symbols to represent numbers. Instead of having 50 pebbles it may have be sufficient to use some symbol that represented the quantity 50. For example greek and roman numerals are somewhat widely known still. For example the number five is known to be represented as X. Other forms of symbols where the use of clay tokens to represent different amount such as 1, 10 and 100 was developed in the what is known today as Iran. Many number systems began to emerge, but what most of them converged into was the indian-arabic one, one which looks very much like what we are familar with today.

**Decimal systems**

Something we take quite granted today is our beloved decimal system. Although it took some time for people to agree on what base was most appropiate for counting and representing numbers, the decimal system eventually triumphed. George writes that "It can almost seem like it's an innate characteristic of human beings, but in reality it belongs to human culture". Infants also cannot grasp abstraction of numbers until much later stages in their childhood, suggesting that number concepts must be learned and evolve socially. Similarly animals does not seem to have the faculty apart from some basic sense of numbers. Referring here to the decimal number system he emphasize the long history where it was not invented and that it's not something we are born with. The signifiance of this invention was great. It was a great advancement because numbers in the decimal system numbers can be expressed in abstract terms to represent "physical properties in the world" and "come from the mind that studies things". Through that it was enabled even more as tool for our mind to understand and study the world around us. This system is based on positional values such that 9 can change it's meaning depending on it's position in a number. To accomplish this a quite great invention had to take place, the invention of the zero. According to George this discovery was made "In Babylon in the second millennium BCE". We started from simple counting but the development of abstract number systems created the basis for more sophisticated computational as arithmetic was invented.

The abstract number systems like the decimal was on that had to be developed and acquired slowly. Particularly what allowed us to advance was:
1. The ability to assign a "rank-order" to each element in a procession
2. The ability to insert into each unit of the processeion the memory of all those that have gone past
3. The ability to convert a sequence into a "stationary" vision.

The rule of the position or positional value of numbers came to mind of people and thus base systems began to emerge. In the base-ten systems digits are grouped into tens, tens-of-tens and so on and was adopted by the **indo-europeans**. The sanskrit language spread out to many cultures and there are signs of them in language like spanish, italian and french as well as german. The base-ten system was not chosen, it relates to our "mental world" where it makes alot of sense. During this period where number systems were evolving so was science and many cultures began to develop intellectually in fields such as medicine, biology, physics, astronomy and of course mathematics. Basically society began to really take advantage of all the tools that now were available to them and the understanding of our world exponentially grew. Schools and education systems began to emerge, libraries and scientific observatories were built. That's why we need to appreciate the ability we have to learn, to educate and to study great ideas and works. 

**Greek mathematics**

The greeks were interested in mathematics and particularly geometry. There are many great ideas that come from this era and many of those were summarized in Euclid's book *The elements* which is perhaps the oldest still in use mathematics book. Euclid's book contained generations of mathematical ideas and where the first time we see logical reasoning and proofs. The greeks didn't only use mathematics for building, constructions and calculations. They advanced mathematics as a pure intellectual and philosophical exercise. Some contradictionary discoveries were made in 18th and 19th century that led to search for new formal foundations for mathematics.

**Sophisticated mathematics**

The decimal number system really is elegant. It allows us to arithmetic and represent any number whatever quantity and the base-ten system now is the basis for universal measurement systems and everyone can understand it's meaning. The sophistication of this number system provided foundation for advancing our understanding and measuring of the world most clearly observed when studying the field of *physics* and science in general. "By the 19th century, physics had painted a clear picture of the universe. We could build steam engines, predict the rotation of Mercury's elliptical orbit within 0.01 degree, and explain behaviors of liquids and gases with amazing precision." Newton's laws stands as the beginning of this era of using mathematics to describe laws of nature. 

**Digital computation**

David A. Patterson og John L. Hennessy writes in the beginning of their book *Computer organization and Design* "Computers have led to a third revolution for civilization, with the information revolution taking it's place alongside agricultural and industrial revolutions". There is no doubt that digital computing has provided not only a tool for making faster mathematical computations, but to use to search for knowledge through storing and displaying media such as text, video and sound. The digital computing revolution started with replacing human calculators for mathematical computing but have been extended to be general information processors perhaps similarly to how our brains work. Neural networks are models of the brain which have inspired computer scientist to be able to make computers understand and play the game of chess, identifying objects in a picture and recognizing speech, things we would characterize as human intelligence. David and John cite Alfred North Whitehead from his 1911 book *An introduction to Mathematics* from 1911, which he writes that "Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform without thinking about them." To a large extend we see and experience this "advancement" as we engage with these digital technologies through our personal computers or phones, web pages and databases residing on private or cloud servers, or embeded computers in watches, automobiles and so on. These systems are becoming smarter and smarter as technological improvements roll out. One of the exciting areas right now is how scientific fields like physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, chemistry, economics and more are using digital tools to explore new areas of their field and perhaps solve problems that couldn't be solved before. 

Alan Turing as we shall see has played a great role formulating this idea of a machine which can from very simple pieces and a simple set of instructions be a universal computing machine. On top of his vision many brilliant ideas throughout history have enables us to tackle problems that weren't possible before. Through application software digital computers and devices have come part of everyday life and helps every business, government and private household accomplish their day-to-day activities. Programming is used to write application software which covers a broad spectrum from mobile and web applications to entire enterprise systems and videogames. It can be used in healthcare, sports, manufacturing or control aircrafts, spaceships and cars. Almost any real world problem can somehow be represented digitally such as finding the shortest path from A to B by constructing a graph or making the most optimal decision by defining an agent and it's actions known as reinforcement learning. Computers can generate texts, videos, sound and images and learn from recorded examples to adjust it's behavior. In this chapter we will explore some applications for applying programming to problem solving and more generally understand the role of digitalisation in business and in our life.

It's quite remarkable how humans have harnessed the forces of nature by seeking to understand. We must reconnect with that nature to keep learning. We need to keep questioning and examine our own instincts and behaviors as there in likely lies developments. For example it's a natural reaction to be judgemental of those who don't look like oneself in skin, but skin color only depends on the intensity of sunlight.
