We've now arrived at the most fun and exciting part of the journey, to apply all the fundamental concepts we have studied and mastered on this journey so far. We have gone from physics, devices, logic gates, architecture, machine language, assembly, compiling and operating systems to understand the system that we stand on the shoulders on from the ground and up. Now it's time to apply our knowledge to make real and useful value through applied software engineering. 
When we are programming we are fundamentally applying data structures and algorithms and that is exactly what we are trying to do. 


# Engineering with AI
Artificial intelligence is an age old topic in the field of computer science. However in the more recent past it has gotten a lot of public attention rather than being solely an academic exercise. One reason is that the computational demands for these systems haven't really been met until lately. The power of new GPUs and CPUs makes it possible to process an enourmous amount of instructions (in a very short time) that operate on data. To most people this culminated when OpenAI launched the first web based experience of interaction with artificial intelligence. ChatGPT was the name and it's a large language model, a model that is trained in vasts amounts of digital data. By running all of this data through the model it is capable of making sense of natural language *prompts* and also generate responses using natural language. Later it has been added such that you can generate prompts with speech and also receive the response in oral form. You can also send and generate pictures. What sits beneath this application interface is a machine learning model and particularly an *autoregressive* language model is the one behind the most prominent large language models (p. 5)

The question many organizations and individuals asks themselves lately is, how can these tools be useful for accomplishing tasks? What we are going to look into here is the best possible explanation i can give in terms of what artificial intelligence is at the bottom of it all and secondly how it can be used for productivity gains. Problems like these fall under the sphere of AI. No different from problems like adding two numbers, but because they are seen to be more *humanly unique* than that arithmetic. In any case we need to 
1) State and understand the problem
2) Come up with a solution that can be implemented using the computers hardware platform
