The next question may now be: How do we redeem the value that data naturally can have in systems where agents can utilize information? That seems like a more difficult question to answer, but my hope with this book is to find at least a good guess. 

**Data literacy**
For FC Midtjylland to turn around their trajectory and compete for top spots in the league it took a new owner with a liking for data. Matthew Benham has a very interesting story as throughout his career he has been able to make use of data and to turn it into his own benefit. His story is an inspiration for anyone in data roles and one which I believe will make even the biggest skeptics tip their hat. In 2001 at the start of Matthews career he was hired by a firm in the gambling industry. He had made a statistical model which could predict football scores more accurately than bookmakers. Three years later In 2004 he went on to found his own company Smartodds which collected data about football matches and sold that to professional gamblers. In 2007 he became invested in Brentford football club at a time when they were struggling in the lower leagues in England, five years later in 2012 Brentford was in the third tier league in England. At this point Matthew took over full control of the club and with that he could now implement his mathematical and statistical modeling fully. His style has since been compared to the story of Billy Beane, general manager of Oakland A’s portrayed by Brad Pitt in Moneyball. In the season 2014/2015 when he also took over FC Midtjylland, Brentford was promoted to the second best league for the first time in 21 years. The same upwards trajectory that FC Midtjylland enjoyed in the following years culminated In 2021 when Brentford was promoted to the premier league for the first time in 74 years.. What stands out to me is Matthew's insistence on using data and his evident success to do so throughout his career. In the beginning when he founded smartOdds there would be a number of people physically located at the sports venues recording the key events that happened. This is a testament to how invested he was and the eye he had for incorporating data into the organizations he came in touch with. He focused on generating a database and if the data wasn't readily available he would make sure to create it. Somehow he was able to find a way to make data an asset for himself or the business he runs. What it may be is that he is data literate, a skill that has made Matthew stand out in his career and may be pivotal for anyone that seeks to accomplish what this book is about. If we look back in history being literate means being educated and capable of reading, writing and communicating. Literacy is also used in other areas such as computer literacy that means one's ability to use and work efficiently with computers or financial literacy, the ability to make financial decisions. The term data literacy on the other hand refers to the ability to use data with the same fluency as one may read and write. A child that learns to read and write does so by imitating others who are successful and by expressing themselves in order to get feedback and then adjust accordingly. There is very much trial and error going on. Becoming data literate is very similar. It is a process of going through trial and error and aspire to become well educated like Matthew Alexander Benham. Ben Jones, the author of Data literacy fundamentals, compares the process to that of acquiring a second language. To learn a language you would typically immerse yourself in the language listening, watching and conversing in a target language. In an era where ever more data is generated this ability to be fluent in data generates more opportunities for expression and making something that is valuable. Like a child trying to master reading, writing and speaking one has to become an active data practitioner. There are some questions you may ask yourself to assess your digital and data literacy could be:

- Am I making an effort to gather information in the form of data that I can put to use in my professional or personal life?
- Did I make an effort today to hone my data literacy abilities like exploring data in some dataset, collecting data from the web or a database, transforming data or building a visualization?
- Do I understand the various statistical algorithms that are used in machine learning or AI applications and know how to assess their validity? 
- Am I focusing on finding value in data by analyzing information needs for some process?
- Am I educating myself and believe that data should be used for the greater good in an ethical manner? 

Some of these questions are inspired by the Data and AI literacy framework that Bill Schmarzo writes about in his book Data and AI literacy.. There are really no shortcuts to increasing one's data literacy other than to practice the language of data, something I myself have tried to develop a recipe for. The language of data really is not consisting of words and grammatical rules but instead the ability to use data for its chief outcome. This outcome can be achieved in various ways but to take a deliberate approach is to practice data management.
