This is no surprise as it has been throughout history the innovative forces that have altered the landscape, it just so happens that data and analytics have been such a source for the past decades. In the first industrial revolution new technology such as steam engines that engineered new manufacturing processes and over time productivity gains found their way into everything from agriculture to textile and food production.  There is strong evidence that data and analytics is going to have similar disruptive patterns in what has been called the fourth industrial revolution. Like the artisans and neglects of the 19th century, those businesses that will hold back and ignore the real potential of data could end up metaphorically speaking relegating for the second division. The world of sports have produced some of the best examples of what may be called the "analytical divide", where competitive leagues offer randomized control trial for our data success research. The services that sports teams deliver are completely similar and clubs within the same league have typically a limited set of parameters which they can compete on; some obvious ones are financial resources, talent, training facilities and staff. They often go head to head competing for points which provides a very objective measure of quality and how they rank against each other. Teams with greater financial resources typically have an edge as it allows them to attracting better talent, build better facilities and hire the best staff. However there are also stories of teams that even against those odds have managed to compete and gain competitive advantages. I want to provide two examples and let you decide for yourself if you're willing to accept this as an argument for the increase in organizational performance which data can provide. The first story have origins back to the 1999 where the Danish football club FC Midtjylland was founded by merging two smaller clubs that both competed in the second best division in Denmark. The year after in 2000 they were promoted to play in the best league against teams with much higher budgets and professional experience. FC Midtjylland kept themselves in the best league but the first ten years didn't bring in any major trophies. Being behind some of the largest cities in Denmark in terms of financial resources and attractiveness of the big city life this club had to play by their own rules in order to compete for the championship. Something happened in 2014 because for the next 10 years from 2014 to 2024 FC Midtjylland ranked first at the end of four seasons and finished second in three seasons. This is quite a remarkable achievement going from having no trophies to being the second most winning team during that decade only with half the budget of larger, more established teams in the league. Now with the success this team has enjoyed, the financial gap is no longer that wide. So what was it that changed? In July 2024 IFREQ Football writes an article "The Use of Big Data by FC Midtjylland: A Revolution in Football Player Recruitment" and in this article it is made clear that FC Midtjylland has made it an priority to use data to "create a competitive edge". The article explains that in 2014 Matthew Benham became a majority owner. As an owner of the British football club Brentford FC, Benham was known for his enthusiasm with statistics and data. He changed many aspects of how FC Midtjylland did their business, among them their recruitment process and training sessions. Instead of relying on observations by scouts and networks, they started using algorithms for finding talent at a lower cost. Data helped make decisions on when to rest players based on data about their condition, their tactics and how to develop their style of football in general. This led to getting more talent, getting more out of that talent by optimizing their training and the playing style of the team. The success story of FC Midtjylland is one of analytical success and if you're still not convinced, then let me take you for a trip across the Atlantic ocean. Here we find a similar striking story in the national basket association (NBA) in the United states. Golden state warriors has been both lucky to have some of the most talented players during the span of seven years from 2015 to 2022, but usually raw talent is evened out between teams with the structure of the league giving the lower ranking teams higher priority picks in the draft. They won four championships in a decade from 2014 to 2024 in which they have been in six finals and won four of them being the only team to win consecutive titles in this span. Their success have been analyzed by various experts and it's been heavily suggested that their use of data and analytics have enabled the superior performance in a league where the budgets are pretty much evened out. Like FC Midtjylland, Golden State Warriors lead the league when it comes to the use of data and analytics using it to analyze and adjust player performance, recruitment and setting up plays. Another example from a popular American sport, baseball is presented in *The Sentient Enterprise*, which explains how teams use data down to the rotation and arc of the baseball “to help determine if a pitcher is getting fatigued” and find competitive edges.  The ability to collect, analyze, and use data has been fundamental for the success for these sports teams and businesses a like. Anecdotes from the world of sports and business may not be a strong enough premise to generalize to any scenario. There are several studies that have tried to research this area such as the one in the introduction to *Data quality: empowering business with analytics and AI* by Prashanth Southekal. He cite a study from McKinsey (Böringer et al 2022) and Boston consulting (Manly et al 2022) which support the argument as they find that  *data-driven* organizations are found in top percentiles of companies when classifying the most innovative companies, but also when directly comparing economic data. Rick Sherman, the author of the Business Intelligence Guidebook refers in his book to study from Bain which showed that companies with advanced analytical capabilities outperformed competitors by having:

- 2x more likely to be in the top quartile of financial performance
- 5x more likely to make decisions faster
- 3x more likely to execute decisions as intended
- 2x more likely to use data frequently in decision-making

Organizations like FC Midtjylland and Golden State Warriors but likewise in other industries like retail and social media, with examples such as Amazon and Netflix. However we have to be careful however how much read from these results in complex matters like these there can be a lot of correlation and confounding. For example it could be that it is the successful companies which have the means and resources to invest in the resources needed. Before we go further i want to break down why it may be that these success stories arise and why so many studies seem to come to the conclusion that organizations that master data also achieve superior outcomes. For that we are going to build our foundational understanding by looking at decision theory, the role of information in systems and the technological advancement that have created larger discrepancy between those that master these complex machines and those that do not. 