Up until now we have studied the foundation for why data skills are sought after. The role of information and knowledge is important from the perspective of decision theory and systems thinking. Likewise skills to handle data are becoming more important given several advancements in technology is increasing the capabilities to generate, capture and manufacturer productive assets with data as a central element. Secondly we studied how organizations should manage this resource, the oil of the most recent industrial revolution. Here we found data management ideas with three core activities: data governance activities, lifecycle activities and foundational activities. Thirdly we studied the process of manufacturing data centered assets starting with understanding the business and operating model of the company and it's strategic direction. We studied how we can use qualitative research methods such as interviews and tools such as business model diagrams, user journeys and systems mapping to build our use cases from a place of emphasizing, a core principle of design thinking. Fourthly we took a look at some practical examples of the data lifecycle, and developed the knowledge factory concept even more. Finally some under appreciated set of expertise were mentioned and discussed. I mentioned them at the final stage because it is some skills that are simply useful for all professional activities, also those that are not just about building the knowledge and data centric factory. We ought to develop our problem solving skills, become proactive (playing to win) and use our data literacy to design the desired futures for the organizations we come in contact with. 
