To put context to where we are right now we have to go back to the late 1970s where the term *decision support system* was first mentioned in the title of the book *Decision Support Systems: An organizational perspective* written by Scott Morton and Peter G.W. Keen. We might consider that to be the birth of the professional use of data, there is however though a well known example from even earlier where the U.S. military was using real-time radar data supported by the SAGE air defense system which *"helped human operator monitor and coordinate air defense."* This was back in the 1960s, where users interacted with the SAGE system through light pens and CRT displays. During those years several noticeable technological advances took place, most importantly the invention and improvement of the transistor devices that enabled miniaturization of hardware. Alongside inventions in hardware, there was an incredible surge in software productivity and programmability with the introduction of high-level programming, terminals and monitors. With hardware and software becoming ever more sophisticated businesses began to run their operations supported by software such as accounting, manufacturing and product design systems. Accompanying these systems were the development of database software needed to manage the data produced as a result. Back then data was mostly viewed as a byproduct (some might argue that it still is to some extend) however it was not long before workers wanted to get their hands on the data which they would make a lot of effort to do so. The software industry heard the demand and new technologies came along allowing large scale data storage and processing as well as analytical visualization software. Later came the cloud and distributed storage and compute that again strengthened the capabilities around working with data and analytics. If there had been no development from the first versions of decision support systems it may not have been worth devoting resources to understand and master data and analytics, but the reality is that storing simple text files became databases and simple software that were called decision support systems, became advanced business intelligence software capable of expressing data in rich ways, creating data storytelling. Former analog statistical exercises have new digital versions, that allows making descriptive and inferential statistics over large amounts of data. Coupling that with development of algorithms in varying degrees of complexity from regression to neural networks, there is a third explanation for why the value and demand of data has shifted outwards. Most organizations don't want to miss this opportunity. 



