At the beginning of this book I tried to justify to the reader that subject of study here is worthwhile. I spend some time on providing clear examples of success with data for example in the sports industry. The sports industry is prevalent for how well suited it is for direct comparison and isolating the factors that make some teams more competitive than others. Businesses typically vary to a larger degree which makes it more difficult to exactly attribute any success to the use of data as a competitive element. Role models offer inspiration and when I read and studied Matthew Benham’s story and how he impacted FC Midtjylland it encouraged me to continue the study and overcome the barriers there have been throughout the process of writing this book. I want to look for some of those stories in other lines of business that can serve as inspiration for imitation in the acquisition of data literacy. This can both be organization-wide success but also remarkable individual success stories like that of Matthew Benham. In my search I came upon a book written in 2020 by Marco Iansiti and Karim R. Lakhani. This book was written during a time where the global pandemic had shocked the world including the corporate. This can be noted because the author opens up the book with a personal story of how they had to cut a trip to Europe short and rush back to Boston. They lay out the timeline of important events related to the pandemic and that reveals an interesting and important insight. Only about 40 days after the first reported case of coronavirus was the first batch of a vaccine against it manufactured. In may 2020 around five months after the first registered cases was the FDA approving the phase 1 review of a vaccine, and with the beginning of phase 2 development the vaccine could be ready for the market in what looked to be eleven months. This rate of innovation is quite remarkable and indeed the first vaccines were being approved in December of 2020 around 11 months after the first outbreak, beating the previous record of vaccine development by miles. While a few companies managed to progress at this pace, Marco and Karim focused on a company called Moderna. What made Moderna capable of this precedent pace of progress? As the title of the book may suggest, the company is built on what the authors called an “AI factory” where the “fundamental idea is to industrialize the company’s approach to data, analytics and artificial intelligence. AI factory does for analytics what industrialization did for manufacturing more than hundred years ago” (p. 9). Moderna adopts data platform that organizes the mRNA data used for vaccine development but, also everything from financial and manufacturing data. This makes it an interesting case to study for data professionals. The title of the book *Competing in the Age of AI* seems very fitting and a company like Moderna seems to be a clear example of an analytical success story in an industry that has the potential to use data to solve major challenges. Looking at the stock price of Moderna since its peak in 2021 offers a reminder that an AI factory is not going to remove vulnerabilities that every businesses face such as the natural reduction in demand for coronavirus vaccines and the forces of competition. 

The healthcare industry wasn't the only one to rapidly innovate as a result of the pandemic. Marco and Karim share a similar story of the major retail company IKEA. IKEA was forced to shut down their physical stores for business which meant their only selling channel was e-commerce. “IKEA responded.. In one week, the company migrated thirteen different regional websites to the cloud.., consolidating and integrating all regional data. Over three weeks, the company’s merchandising, pricing and distribution executives learned to use technology, data and AI to shape a fully digital retail experience” (p. 21) What is interesting about this  examples as well as the development of a vaccine, is the rapid progress and transformative power that lies latent in businesses that only shows when standing on a burning platform. IKEA moved to a modern data platform where they began using the data for analytics at all ends of the spectrum. Now speaking of retail, there is a company with headquarters in Seattle that is difficult not to include in the list of the ones that have embraced analytics. Traditionally retail was built around physical stores and scaling up with larger warehouses and distribution networks. More transactions means a need for more physical stores, more employees and a growing complexity. The digital version bypasses many of these complexities coming with larger investments involved with opening new stores and having to train a large number of new employees. There is a particular company that has centered its business model around digitizing, using data and analytics to re-architect the traditional business model in retail. The company I am referring to here is Amazon and with over two billion visitors in a regular month Amazon is one of the most visited websites globally. Marco and Karim similarly does not fail to mention this company and describes that “The key to Amazons (success) is its increasingly digital operating model.” (p. 10)  The application of data into AI, machine learning, and robotics to make operational decisions, execute tasks and in general achieve operational excellence have been a striking example of data literacy. Amazon uses data about transactions to analyze frequently bought items to scale up processes like recommending products. With more transactions more is learned and the better recommendations become, something which would require an increasing number of employees covering a broad spectrum of expertise in the analog version. Retail is perhaps one of the industries that have most evidently been rewarding the analytical mature companies and left the less data literate organizations behind with "more than twenty long-standing retailers filing for bankruptcy in 2017, even 125-year-old giant Sears joined the list in 2018." There are many case studies like these to get acquainted with and I believe this is a very fruitful activity for any data professional to seek out inspiration both in terms of what to do and what not to do.