This introductory chapter attempted to establish why data and the things we can create from it are valuable for organizations. As the first data-centric systems was called decision support systems i decided to look for an answer within theoretical study of decisions. In my research i also stumbled upon Donella Meadows work on *Thinking in systems* and therein i found some answers to my question. Decision theory helps us by making it explicit what difference information can make for outcome of decisions. Making decisions is an inherent part of business and life and most of those decisions have elements of uncertainty. The agent tries to optimize some subjective measure of utility under this uncertainty by estimating the expected utility different choices offers. By having access to high quality and perhaps superior information, the decision maker can adjust her behavior both in terms of what she considers to be high utility, but also what route gives her the highest chance maximizing it. The raw data that we may generate, capture and transform can be digital objects that represent the *true state of the world* a source of decision support. 

From a systems thinking standpoint Donella helps us view organizations as systems and through this lens it becomes apparent that information plays a critical role, providing feedback that can guide behaviors. With some clearly defined dimension and metrics which to move towards, data systems enable those feedback loops that are critical leverage points for changing system behaviors. To leverage this in our personal lives many people are budgeting because they know track income and spending helps them adjust and make better financial decisions.

Finally what may also help establish the reason for building knowledge and data-centric factories may be that technology is simply getting more powerful. The ways in which raw data material can be generated, stored and activated continuously expands and recently it has created a range of new opportunities.

Together these three arguments help justify the investments that management teams are making in digital infrastructure and data systems that becomes the basis for leveraging this "new oil" as it has been called. 

The chapter also presented a few case studies where the theoretical background somewhat was put to the test. In competitive industries like sports both cases provided examples of superior organizational outcomes to which much of the success was attributed to superior use of data and analytics. This was recognized both by internal sources but also people who observed things happened from the outside and therefore gives us something to strive for as data professionals. Obviously two examples cannot by themselves equate that companies who utilize data better achieve better organizational results in the long run and so i also looked towards the scientific literature. There are studies out there which also makes industry comparisons and those who they consider most data-driven end up performing better on several important business metrics. 

Building business systems that have access to information seems to be our most chief objective as data professionals and for the rest of this book we will try and derive ways of going about that. 