The first two views on what makes data value related to the mechanisms with which it can make systems and decision makers better of. This third argument comes at it from a different angle, namely how new technology has kept pushing the boundaries of how sophisticated and rich we can make these intelligent systems.  

We have to go back to the late 1970s to find the first uses of the term *decision support system* as it was mentioned in the title of the book *Decision Support Systems: An organizational perspective* written by Scott Morton and Peter G.W. Keen. This period can be considered the birth of the professional use of data. During those years several noticeable technological advances took place. The most important one like the invention and improvement of the transistor devices that enabled miniaturization of hardware. This meant that we could store and process more information making computers more computationally powerful. Alongside inventions in hardware, there was an incredible surge in software productivity and programmability with the introduction of high-level programming, terminals and monitors which all were introduced around this time. This ever more sophisticated and powerful computing systems resulted in businesses supporting their operations through applications such as accounting, manufacturing and product design systems. Storing data effectively was an important problem to solve as these systems would require some management of stored information. This led to the development of *database* software which was designed to effectively store and manage data. Technology to build business intelligence or decision support was not that well developed still and the storage and compute needed for those types of workloads meant a reduced appetite for using data analytically. It didn't endure long however before workers wanted to get their hands on the data as they sought to get updates on the business. That resulted in many personal extract jobs and what became known as the spider-web architecture. Businesses were seeking better ways of going about putting data to productive use and so the software industry heard the demand and soon new technologies came along allowing more streamlined and scalable ways of working with data. The concept of the data warehouse emerged first on-premise servers and later came the cloud with distributed storage and compute. This yet again strengthened the capabilities around working with data and analytics, leading to the term *big data* as most businesses now were no longer constrained by storage limits. Storage had become much cheaper and far greater with the introduction of large and highly efficient data centers. The reason i bring this historical perspective is that if there had been no development from the first versions of decision support systems then the value proposition of data would have been somewhat constrained as well. The reality is that storing simple text files became databases and simple software that were called decision support systems, became advanced business intelligence software capable of expressing data in rich ways, creating data storytelling. Analog statistical exercises could be performed using digital versions, bringing descriptive and inferential statistics over large amounts of data never before seen. Coupling that with development of algorithms in varying degrees of complexity from regression to neural networks, there is a third explanation for why the value and demand of data has shifted outwards as most organizations benefits from having access to these *decision support* systems. 


