Decision theory offers an explanation for why people and organizations value data. It improves their *utility* as the gap between perfect and current information shrinks. As i did research for this book i noticed the word *systems thinking* popped up. I decided to pick up Donella Meadows *Thinking in Systems* and it turned out to provide a perspective that similarly helped me understand the value proposition of data. Starting with a definition of a system Meadows define it as the *collection of elements, interconnections and purpose*. This definition is broad enough to describe anything from households, football teams, data teams, trees or businesses. It's really when Meadows begins to write about the role of information in systems that she caught my attention. In one of her chapters covering this topic she writes.

> **“Missing information flows is one of the most common causes of system malfunctioning.”**  
> (_Thinking in Systems_, p. 157)

This is an interesting point because as data professionals we are essentially designing information flows. Similarly she writes.

> **“Thou shall not distort, delay, or withhold information (in a system).”**

Again this caught my eye as that sentence deals with information and emphasize it's importance in systems. To really put this into perspective Meadows reference a Dutch experiment where two groups of households were fitted with electric meters. The interesting thing is that in some homes, the meters were installed in the basement and in others, they were installed in the front hall. From the perspective of systems thinking, the one group did not have the same seamless information flow. With might also say that their information is somewhat distorted or withhold at least compared to the other group. The group with the meters installed in plain sight on the other hand had information readily available. What was the result? As Meadows theory would suggest, the difference in energy consumption would be substantial. In this case 30 percent. From a business perspective the ability to cut costs or anything that could raise the bottom line just a few percent will grab the attention of managers. With millions on the line the ability to reinvest those in new ventures can have substantial impact on the business both short and long-term. This may help explain why organizations devote significant resources to cloud storage, computing power, and teams of engineers and analysts. 

As we go about our everyday we might also encounter this mechanisms. When we drive cars we get help from dashboards displaying data about speed, fuel, and location. As we drive, we glance at the information, and each glance is feedback allowing us to adjust our behavior to arrive safely at the right location while avoiding a speeding ticket. The same way the household would look at the meter and adjust their behavior in a way that would be maximizing their utility to use decision theory language. That means they would be more aware of turning of lights, closing windows and doors to spare energy.

Meadows describe the mechanism with which information is used in systems by describing it as a  **feedback loop** mechanism. In the case of the electric meters they provide feedback to the system (household) about their energy consumption. The reason she writes that "Thou shall not distort, delay or withhold information (in a system)" becomes more clear now after studying the results of the Dutch experiment. For the families with meters in the hall, information was at plain sight making it a integrated part of the system creating a feedback loop an information flow. 
The households with meters in the basement on the other hand couldn't access the information with the same easy creating an abrupt information flow effectively removing the feedback loop. 

This experiment showcased that data is valuable but only if it actually is connected to a feedback loop and making it readily available becomes an important part of any solution design. In my view the systems thinking perspective provides a complementary and important explanation for the value proposition of data. The exact mechanisms through feedback loops and closing the gap between perfect and current information creates better foundation for systems be it businesses, individuals or teams adjust their behavior towards maximizing their utility. In the sections to come i will return to Meadows work and systems thinking when we explore how to unlock this value of data and information.  