While i have introduced some tools, mindsets and habits that can help achieve better success with data, there is no substitute for hard work and experience. Getting practice and acquiring data literacy is something that does not come over night and not by itself. It requires work and we've been through some practical examples of how to gain expertise that helps you built knowledge factories. Data management, design and implementation with data cycle expertise. Practicing these areas is cultivating creativity something which Wouter Groeneveld investigates in his book *The creative programmer*. He defines creativity as ones ability to problem solve. His investigation leads to the argument that technical knowledge is a key component for elevating one's creativity and quality of work. I can think of a few examples from several lines of work. For example 

1) The chef that tastes food knowing exactly what spice to add, 
2) The sports coach that change the formation or make other tactical dispositions in the middle of the game or 
3) The car mechanic that just by looking and listening to the sound of the car knowns exactly what bolts to tighten. 
To me these are all examples of creativity and they come with extensive technical knowledge and experience.  

Gaining technical knowledge in the manufacturing of knowledge and data-centric solutions can also be practiced. Someone like Matthew Benham seems to posses many such skills, perhaps most importantly he was not only talking about data, he actually put it to productive use in innovative ways no one had seen before. He had the creativity to *generate* the data in the first place all of which requires immersion with the data language. Matthew found ways to bring the data all the way from generation to the people who make critical day-to-day, season-to-season decisions and so mastered the tools for integrating raw data, transforming and serving it or knew someone who did. What it means is that we should practice foundational technological skills such as computer science and particularly those that touch data systems. That includes databases, software engineering and so on. Building upon the computer science we have concepts such as data warehouse architecture and how to design elegant data journeys from ingestion, transformation and serving. 

**Practicing the fundamentals**
That goes into understanding businesses and their systems. Talking to business people and domain experts emphasizing with them through diagramming business processes and mapping systems is a big part of that. We should practice data management to take responsibility of long term success with data by having good practices around data such as quality and metadata management. We should practice data modeling at all levels to understand how the systems produce and generate data that can be captured. Finally we need to go the last mile of ingesting, transforming and serving data in iterative loops such that it becomes part of systems and produce valuable results. 

By learning new technologies and practicing data literacy you are able to push new ideas down the value chain and by understanding the value chain you are able to pull ideas from bottom up. This is a nice balance that has to be found between formal requirements gathering and technological push, something we see in both business and science. For example the invention of the radio was credited to ... but actually it was some rather abstract and experimental discoveries that led concepts like electromagnetism and hertz that allowed this design. That's why we should keep experimenting and learning in combination with asking and emphasizing with business people. 

As data professionals much of the work we do can be categorized as *knowledge work*. It means that our knowledge is what produces our work and how we provide value for businesses. It's our knowledge of how to manage data, how to model data and design data solutions, how to perform data lifecycle activities and how to use programming or other tools for all of those tasks. In addition as professionals, which is not unique for those who work with data, there will unavoidably be many different types situations that gives us a chance to use our brain. Decision making and finding to a solution, identifying misinformation, noise and fallible arguments that reach us everyday is something we can take responsibility for getting better at. The ability to think critically and creatively is perhaps the antidote to these inevitable encounters. We sometimes are under the influence of our own human nature, that has equipped us with an ability to quickly determine the next action or what to believe. Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky's put this idea to the test with their numerous experiments and developed the notion of system 1 and system 2 thinking. In their work they summarized a set of biases that when left unchecked can leave us to behave in irrational ways. At the same time, we are getting more access to information and misinformation.
